Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project interviewer Steve Fletcher.
The location of the interview is the Swicker office.
Today's date is the 13th of October 2015 and with me I have Sarah and Ren.
Ren would you be kind enough to go first and spell your name in full for the record?
I'm Ren Hubbock-Mellie, so that's R-E-N-N-N-N-H-U-B-B-U-C-K-M-E-L-L-Y.
Lovely. Sarah would you do the same please?
I'm Sarah Annoil, which is spelled S-A-R-A-A-N-N-W-Y-L.
Lovely and we're off. So the carnival just gone, Cardiff Carnival 2015.
How and in what way did you lovely people take part?
Well, we were participating in glorious fashion by puppeteering a giant blue bald naked fertility goddess
down through the streets of Cardiff, which is an awesome experience.
A really hard physical work and just really, really sort of celebratory and fun as well as quite adversarial at times.
Of course, the vision and the author of the work was Nicky Fogarty.
What were her influences when she made this piece?
I remember she said some photographs with me way before she ever bent a willow cane and covered it with anything.
I think the whole idea grew and grew and grew until it became enormous and became much bigger than she expected.
That's true.
She was looking into pre-Columbian fertility goddess ideas basically around feminine empowerment and feminine sexuality.
But accessing a whole load of sort of contemporary and sort of 70s feminist ideas about the female radical sort of sexual power.
I remember her showing me a picture of a sort of a pre-Columbian fertility goddess and we both agreed that,
yeah, she's all bum, belly and bust. That's what she's going to be.
Nicky was saying that.
So Nicky's inside this backpack and she's in a sense coming down.
She's an extension of the spine of this giant blue woman who's got to be at least three meters high, if not higher.
And I'm right in thinking that she's in a, we can name it, why not, we're advertising a Tesco trolley too.
And that she has two hands which can be operated as well and they're on bamboo sticks.
And this is where you both come in. Is that right?
Yeah.
Yes. So what was it like operating that?
What was it? Because it seems to be quite a powerful statement to be parading a giant,
naked blue woman through the streets of Cardiff in 2015.
Exactly the kind of statement I personally approve of.
How did the audience react or not, as the case may be?
Well, there was lots of different kind of reactions.
The older women were cheering as soon as they saw it.
Yeah, because there's also not just that this beautiful blue woman,
there's also these quotes that she put on, such as we are people, not things.
She took, I think, from the internet or other places.
So they were all over.
And I think people are also quite confused by what it was.
They weren't entirely sure how to take it.
So the men, a lot of them were just sort of quite quiet and didn't really know how to react.
It was quite interesting that because it wasn't sexy, but it was naked.
She had a big belly, big boobs, big bums.
People were initially like, my god's big naked lady.
And then they were like, well, there's something more being said here.
So that was just, there was not confusion, but an interesting sort of it was the biggest impact,
I think, of that particular carnival.
The biggest.
Yes, it was the biggest single visual statement.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
You know, really strong, really big.
Yes.
And she had half the sky written on the back as well, which is Chinese phrase,
which is basically women are half the sky.
Excellent.
And so she had the sky and the sky theme going through it,
which is why the sculpture was blue and had stars.
Desert and everything at the bottom.
Yeah, that was a thing of great beauty.
And there will be pictures of this in the Victoria archive that we put up as well.
And that's a mistake in your saying that there was one male scallywag who,
in fact, took it upon themselves to express their artistic critical opinion of.
Yeah, I was I was operating one of the hands.
So while Sarah was with the other arm and Nicky was sort of pulling pushing the trolley,
this man sort of stepped out pretty much in front of me and he just looked at it.
And he initially was sort of quite happy to see it, I think,
because it was like a sexy lady.
But then he read some of the quotes and he basically said, F you.
And he tried to laugh it off almost.
And I was like, I was I was not entirely sure what he said at first.
I realized I was it was too late to be like, why did you say that?
And what really offended you about this?
It was interesting because the whole thing wasn't negative.
It's hugely positive.
So basically it was just celebration.
It was saying nothing negative about men, nothing negative about women,
just a celebration of female sexuality.
That's it really.
But basically, because it made it really clear to me as somebody
who basically just assumes that we're all feminists these days,
that that isn't the scenario.
I don't know where you go down the street and you see like men hanging out of windows,
cat calling it.
Yeah.
And you're like, because of the buzz.
Because there's a boo.
It's kind of sad.
But also, yeah, a lot of younger women, one young lady came up to me and said,
can I just ask what this is about?
So she was probably about 18 or 19.
And I said, well, it's about us being people, not things.
And she said, oh, that's what we thought it was about.
Yay.
Yeah, it was positive.
Very positive.
I think it was.
And of course, you did mention what should we call the tumbleweed factor,
that not only did you have the biggest structure with the three of you
weeding it, the length and breadth of Cardiff City Centre,
but then you have the last stretch on the way home.
How were you affected by the wind and the rest of it?
Because it was a big structure.
Basically, I pulled my back out.
Will your lawyers be in touch?
They will, yes.
Because it was hugely heavy.
Really physical.
But that was part of it, really, because you put loads of work into making
the sculpture move and dance and stuff.
We had this really strong wind, especially on Churchill Way.
And we were almost toppled over in this.
It felt almost like both of you had a physical fight as well,
because you had to push this big object.
And it was hard.
It wasn't easy.
And you had to just keep on going.
So it was like this endurance test as well.
And it sort of mirrored the struggle of women.
No, no, there's a synergy about the whole.
Absolutely.
I could see it all in my head.
It was great because we were dressed in blue and we had sky face paint on.
So it was like we were part of the sculpture.
And then to puppety of the arms, we have the dance.
So it's like this thing that we were all part of.
It was really great.
A gestalt being more than the sum of your parts.
Yes.
Yes, that's how I felt about it.
Of course, the Cardiff Parliament War 2015 parade
is not the only parading you have done with Swicker.
You are, if not veterans, then you've certainly had a taste
of more on one occasion of the National St David's Day parade.
How does that feel?
How does that compare?
What are your experiences there?
What did you do?
Were you dragons?
Yeah, that was quite interesting.
Such sculptures that we had on us were probably one of the biggest.
The costies, yeah.
In the carnival.
And there was a lot of attention on us, especially when we got to the end
and we were just out in the castle.
So many people wanted photos and that was really odd.
Ren basically had a shamanic experience.
She went into dragon mode and she wasn't Ren anymore.
Jumping around like, I was a fly.
Sometimes the costume came over.
It really did.
That's what it felt like.
I was in an altar state, definitely.
Really?
It's good.
That's funny.
That's fantastic.
She was photobombing my photos.
Yeah, I was like.
Yeah, the thing about that particular parade is that you get to see in such sort of explicit
and again, celebratory party manner, all the different sort of communities, basically.
So you have people and they're all, you know, the Malaysians of Cardiff or so and so.
It's just so great that everybody's coming together into that thing.
It just doesn't happen.
And it makes you realise how many different communities there are in Cardiff.
Yeah, hidden communities for most of us.
Yes, definitely.
And you're both practicing artists.
I want to again, just for austerity, for we are talking into the future here.
Would you care to say a little bit about yourself as an artist?
You're yeah, well, you've come and practice a statement from Ren.
What do you think, Ren?
I'm a writer and I also perform as well.
And a lot of the stuff that I perform is quite graphic.
It's quite explicit.
It's about the body.
It's about boundaries and a lot of it's about sex.
So I try to sort of broach to be subjects by basically throwing it in people's face.
And it's comic.
Yeah.
And also I host events.
I'm trying to set up a young writers collective called Etch.
I'm also trying to set up an open mic for specifically to
try to encourage people to perform, like to experiment performance as well.
And it's called Duke.
You're not trying to set it up.
You are setting it up.
Yeah, I am.
Yeah.
And also I'm...
Listen to your manager.
I'm also in the third year of uni and my dissertation is creative writing
and is also focused on female sexuality.
So it felt very much synchronous for me to...
To go through that experience in carnival.
Yeah.
And to realize that this fight isn't over.
That we need to keep talking about this.
Yes.
Yeah.
That's not old hat.
No.
Oh, I'm an artist.
I'm a contemporary artist, which means that I do all kinds of stuff,
which are really hard to pigeonhole.
But basically my work as an artist tends to involve engagement with other people,
conversations, work involving video or kind of event based stuff.
I also curate, which means I work with other artists and their practices
to make events happen so they bring all their artwork in.
I'm writing as well and I'm writing a book at the moment.
The main thing, which really was odd about doing the sculptural thing,
is that I've just started a project for three years called Perfect Me,
which isn't feminist per se, but it absolutely hits all of those things,
those things, those kind of targets,
because it's about our relationship to our bodies, our physicality.
So I have a big problem, like most women, accepting my body,
feeling overweight and generally being burdened by the Western objectification of selfhood.
So yeah, it felt very, very, again, synchronous that we were doing it.
But also you're bald.
And also I'm bald.
So not that big of a deal.
I'm a pre-Columbian for tinnitus.
Yeah.
What can I say?
Sara Red, thank you very much indeed.
I'd like to award you the invisible but yet eternal.
You are both heroes of Cardiff Cardinal.
Thank you very much.
Yay, thank you.
That was lovely.